## catalogs

This folder contains raw and unmodified data files taken from published catalogs of eclipsing binaries. I went on to use 'keplerebs_villanova_complete.csv' as my primary dataset for training and testing my models. However, I include the others here either because of their potential for future use or, in the case of 'keplerebs_villanova_kmag_10-15.csv', because I used it in some of my preliminary work (see 'notebooks_messy/Kepler EBs to TIC IDs and Filepaths.ipynb'). 

Here is a brief description of all the files in this folder:

* 'ebcat_tics.txt' is an exception in this folder in that it is not part of a published eclipsing binary catalog. Instead, it's an unpublished list compiled by Ethan Kruse and Brian Powell containing TIC IDs of stars that they flagged (using their own machine learning models) as probable eclipsing binaries. I initially planned to use this list as ground truth to decide which TIC IDs corresponded to EBs and non-EBs; however, upon learning that the list contains an appreciable number of non-EBs and omits an appreciable number of EBs, I decided to instead use it as an additional check for my ground truth in conjunction with the Villanova Kepler EBs dataset ('keplerebs_villanova_complete.csv'). Specifically, I sampled my 2000 non-EBs from the set of TIC IDs that were not present in either 'ebcat_tics.txt' or 'keplerebs_villanova_complete.csv'
* 'justesen_albrecht_table2_748ebs.txt' is a catalog of 748 EBs, mostly detached binaries, taken from Table 2 of the journal article ["Temperature and Distance Dependence of Tidal Circularization in Close Binaries: A Catalog of Eclipsing Binaries in the Southern Hemisphere Observed by the TESS Satellite"](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021ApJ...912..123J/abstract) by Justesen & Albrecht (2021). The list contains TIC IDs, orbital periods, times of primary and secondary eclipses, minimum eccentricity, depths of primary and secondary eclipses, and TESS magnitudes (T-mags) for each entry. Additionally, Table 3 from the same paper (not included in this repository) contains additional orbital and stellar parameters for a selection of 349 EBs from Table 2 that were determined to have reliable parameters. I extracted the Table 2 objects with T-mags between 10 and 15 in 'notebooks_messy/EB Catalogs Messing Around.ipynb', although I didn't go on to use this data since I wanted to constrain my EBs to within a single TESS sector
* 'keplerebs_villanova_complete.csv' is the [catalog of Kepler EBs from Villanova University](keplerebs.villanova.edu) that I ultimately used to train and test my models. It contains 2922 EBs identified by the Kepler mission, most of which lie within TESS sector 14. The catalog contains KIC IDs, periods, period errors, RA/dec, Kepler magnitudes (K-mags), and T<sub>eff</sub> for each star, as well as additional information not relevant to this project
* 'keplerebs_villanova_kmag_10-15.csv' is the same as 'keplerebs_villanova_complete.csv', except it has been filtered to only include the EBs in 'keplerebs_villanova_complete.csv' with K-mags between 10 and 15. I initially used this dataset in preparing to train my models (see 'notebooks_messy/Kepler EBs to TIC IDs and Filepaths.ipynb'), but I realized that I should actually be filtering the list based on T-mag rather than K-mag, so I replaced this list with the complete list mentioned above and went on to filter it based on T-mag (see the section "Redoing the False Positives/Negatives with Full Unfiltered Villanova Kepler Data" and the paragraph just before it in 'notebooks_messy/Sector 14 Kepler EBs Lightcurve Loading and Featurization.ipynb')
* 'simbad_eclipsing_binaries_20000_stars.txt' is a list of 20,000 more or less random EBs returned by [SIMBAD](http://simbad.u-strasbg.fr/simbad/) in response to a query for EBs. (The list can be reproduced by using a "Criteria query" on SIMBAD and typing in "maintypes='EB*'" into the query field.) They are not filtered by magnitude, and they are not listed by any systematic naming scheme (no TIC IDs or KIC IDs; instead, the names are an inconsistent mix, including identifiers like "HD 232102", "V* V959 Cas", and "TYC 3616-2101-1"). The file itself is in the format SIMBAD generates and is not easily machine-readable; see 'notebooks_messy/Eclipsing Binary Get TIC IDs SIMBAD.ipynb' for one example I came up with of how to read it in. Despite the fact that SIMBAD can easily generate large numbers of EBs, I decided against using SIMBAD for two reasons. First, even with my attempts to use [astroquery's SIMBAD module](https://astroquery.readthedocs.io/en/latest/simbad/simbad.html?highlight=simbad) to accomplish this, it couldn't be easily queried for alternate object identifiers (such as TIC ID, which is what I would need in order to cross-reference the EBs it returns with our TESS light curve collection in the [GCP bucket](https://console.cloud.google.com/storage/browser/tess-goddard-lcs)). In fact, the astroquery SIMBAD module documentation page linked above mentions this issue under the heading "A warning about big queries"; unfortunately, its suggested vector-based querying solution doesn't work for querying alternate object identifiers with the query_objectids() function. Second, according to Daniel Giles, SIMBAD's classifications are not reliable enough for us to use as ground truth for a machine learning model
* 'tess_ebs_villanova_tmag_10-15.csv' is the [catalog of TESS EBs from Villanova University](tessebs.villanova.edu), filtered to only include 2156 EBs with T-mags between 10 and 15. It contains TIC IDs, periods, period errors, RA/dec, T-mags, and more information for these stars. Note that as of 6 Sept. 2021, querying this website for all EBs with T-mags between 10 and 15 returns 2545 objects (significantly more than the 2156 listed in the catalog in this repository). I believe this discrepancy is due to the catalog having been updated since my initial query of it towards the beginning of the summer. Also note that the total number of EBs listed in this catalog (without filtering by magnitude) is 4584. As with the Justesen & Albrecht catalog, I didn't use this catalog in training my models because, to start with, I wanted to include only EBs within a single TESS sector. However, it seems to be a high-quality dataset and could certainly be used in the future
